feat: introduce `defineConfig` helper with `experimental_validateOptions` for catching config errors (#2)
ahnpnl/ts-jest: website/docs/experimental.md

---
id: experimental
title: Experimental Features
---

This documentation outlines the experimental features in `ts-jest` that are available for early adoption. These features are designed to gather feedback and will eventually become official features after a series of releases once they are stable.

> 

Reviewer: Please add a danger text block, similar to what like Docusaurus demonstrates here https://docusaurus.io/docs/api/docusaurus-config#future 

<img width="968" height="249" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/16aca775-f6f2-4647-b7cf-f1d0a57680d2" />

You can use the danger block syntax of Docusaurus
```
:::danger
// content
:::
```

## Available Experimental Features

### Option Validation

:::tip

Option validation is now integrated with `defineConfig`. See the [Options guide](../getting-started/options.md#experimental-option-validation) for usage details.

:::

The option validator helps detect typos and invalid configuration options by warning about unrecognized option keys. This feature addresses [issue #925](https://github.com/kulshekhar/ts-jest/issues/925) where ts-jest silently ignores unrecognized options.

> #### Direct Usage

Reviewer: This section shouldn't exist, please remove it. The function `validateOptions` should not be public and only be called by `valibot` schema.

Instead, instruct users to enable this feature via `future` option

```ts title="jest.config.ts"
import { defineConfig } from 'ts-jest'

> export default defineConfig({

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export default defineConfig({
     // ... Jest config options
     future: {
         experimental_validateOptions: true,
     }
});
```

  testEnvironment: 'node',
  transform: {
    '^.+\\.tsx?$': [
      'ts-jest',
      {
        tsconfig: 'tsconfig.json',
      },
    ],
  },
  future: {
    experimental_validateOptions: true,
  },
})
```

When enabled, `ts-jest` will warn you about unrecognized option keys (e.g., `astTransformer` instead of `astTransformers`).

> #### Valid Options

Reviewer: Please remove this section

The validator recognizes the following ts-jest options:

- `tsconfig` - TypeScript configuration
- `isolatedModules` - Compile files as isolated modules
- `compiler` - Compiler to use (typescript, ttypescript, etc.)
- `astTransformers` - Custom AST transformers
- `diagnostics` - TypeScript diagnostics settings
- `babelConfig` - Babel configuration
- `stringifyContentPathRegex` - Regex for content stringification
- `useESM` - Enable ESM support

> #### Known Limitations

Reviewer: Please remove this section

- Validation uses the `rootLogger` from ts-jest for warnings

### Coming Soon

Stay tuned for upcoming experimental features that will be added to `ts-jest`. Each feature will include:

- A clear description of its purpose
- Usage examples
- Known limitations or caveats
- Migration guidance for when the feature becomes stable

## Migration Path

When experimental features mature and become stable:

1. The feature will be documented in the main documentation
2. The feature flag in `future` may be deprecated
3. A migration guide will be provided
4. The feature will eventually become the default behavior in a future major version

## Feedback

If you're using experimental features, your feedback is valuable! Please share your experience:

- Open an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/kulshekhar/ts-jest/issues)
- Join the discussion on [Discord](https://discord.gg/j6FKKQQrW9)
- Start a conversation in [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/kulshekhar/ts-jest/discussions)

## Example Configuration

Here's a complete example of a Jest configuration using `defineConfig`:

```ts title="jest.config.ts"
import { defineConfig } from 'ts-jest'

> export default defineConfig({

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export default defineConfig({
    // ... Jest config options
    future: {
        //... feature flags
    }
});
```

  // ts-jest specific options
  transform: {
    '^.+\\.tsx?$': [
      'ts-jest',
      {
        tsconfig: {
          esModuleInterop: true,
        },
      },
    ],
  },

  // Experimental features
  future: {
    // Future experimental features will be configured here
  },
})
```

> :::tip

Reviewer: We don't need this `tip` block

    experimental_validateOptions: true,
  },
})
```

> :::danger

Reviewer: Please remove this section

> :::caution

Reviewer: This should be replaced by `danger` block as suggested in https://github.com/ahnpnl/ts-jest/pull/2/files#r2419394913

---
id: experimental
title: Experimental Features
---

> `ts-jest` provides experimental features through a `future` configuration option and a `defineConfig` helper function. These features are designed to allow early adoption of new functionality while maintaining backward compatibility.

Reviewer: This sentence is incorrect for this location. The purpose of `experimental` doc is to summarize what are the experimental features will be added in `ts-jest` and eventually become official features after series of releases once they are stable.

Please rephrase this sentence as a summarized sentence for this documentation.

## defineConfig Helper

> The `defineConfig` function is a type-safe helper for defining Jest configurations with `ts-jest`. It provides runtime validation for experimental features specified in the `future` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `defineConfig` function is a type-safe helper for defining Jest configurations with `ts-jest`.
```

The purpose of `defineConfig` is a way devs can define Jest config with OOTB suggestion. Please rephrase this explanation into your sentence

### Basic Usage

```typescript
// jest.config.ts
import { defineConfig } from 'ts-jest'

export default defineConfig({
  preset: 'ts-jest',
  testEnvironment: 'node',
  future: {
    // Experimental features go here
  },
})
```

### Type Safety

The `defineConfig` function provides full TypeScript type checking for your Jest configuration while also adding runtime validation for the `future` option:

> ```typescript

Reviewer: Please use ```ts title="jest.config.ts" so that the code block always refers to a particular file name. This is a best practice when writing docs. You can take a look at https://github.com/kulshekhar/ts-jest/blob/main/website/docs/getting-started/presets.md to know the syntax.

Apply the same for all of code blocks

import { defineConfig } from 'ts-jest'

> export default defineConfig({

Reviewer: We should focus the docs on the `future` option so the example should only contain `future` option. For example
```
export default defineConfig({
    //...Jest config options
    future: {
        // Future experimental features will be documented here as they are added
    }
});
```

---
id: experimental
title: Experimental Features
---

This documentation outlines the experimental features in `ts-jest` that are available for early adoption. These features are designed to gather feedback and will eventually become official features after a series of releases once they are stable.

> ## defineConfig Helper

Reviewer: Please move this doc to https://github.com/ahnpnl/ts-jest/blob/main/website/docs/getting-started/options.md and update this doc so that `defineConfig` is the recommended way to define config. Feel free to refactor the docs if you find it not clear enough. The ultimate goal is making DX become greater

The `defineConfig` function is a type-safe helper that allows developers to define Jest configurations with `ts-jest` and provides out-of-the-box IntelliSense suggestions in their IDE.

### Basic Usage

```ts title="jest.config.ts"
import { defineConfig } from 'ts-jest'

export default defineConfig({
  // ...Jest config options
  future: {
    // Experimental features go here
  },
})
```

> ### Type Safety

Reviewer: Please also move this doc together with `defineConfig` doc.

> The `defineConfig` function provides full TypeScript type checking for your Jest configuration while also adding runtime validation for the `future` option:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `defineConfig` function provides full TypeScript type checking for your Jest configuration as well as `ts-jest` config options
```

### Coming Soon

Stay tuned for upcoming experimental features that will be added to `ts-jest`. Each feature will include:

- A clear description of its purpose
- Usage examples
- Known limitations or caveats
- Migration guidance for when the feature becomes stable

## Migration Path

When experimental features mature and become stable:

1. The feature will be documented in the main documentation
2. The feature flag in `future` may be deprecated
3. A migration guide will be provided
4. The feature will eventually become the default behavior in a future major version

## Feedback

If you're using experimental features, your feedback is valuable! Please share your experience:

- Open an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/kulshekhar/ts-jest/issues)
- Join the discussion on [Discord](https://discord.gg/j6FKKQQrW9)
- Start a conversation in [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/kulshekhar/ts-jest/discussions)

## Example Configuration

Here's a complete example of a Jest configuration using `defineConfig`:

```ts title="jest.config.ts"
import { defineConfig } from 'ts-jest'

export default defineConfig({
  // ... Jest config options
  future: {
    //... feature flags
  },
})
```

> :::danger

Reviewer: Please remove this doc section
